LazarusBY LEONID ANDREYEVTRANSLATED BY ABRAHAM YARMOLINSKY     From _Lazarus and the Gentleman from San Francisco_. Published by     The Stratford Company. By permission of the publishers.IWhen Lazarus left the grave, where, for three days and three nights hehad been under the enigmatical sway of death, and returned alive to hisdwelling, for a long time no one noticed in him those sinister oddities,which, as time went on, made his very name a terror. Gladdenedunspeakably by the sight of him who had been returned to life, thosenear to him caressed him unceasingly, and satiated their burning desireto serve him, in solicitude for his food and drink and garments. Andthey dressed him gorgeously, in bright colors of hope and laughter, andwhen, like to a bridegroom in his bridal vestures, he sat again amongthem at the table, and again ate and drank, they wept, overwhelmed withtenderness. And they summoned the neighbors to look at him who had risenmiraculously from the dead. These came and shared the serene joy of thehosts. Strangers from far-off towns and hamlets came and adored themiracle in tempestuous words. Like to a beehive was the house of Maryand Martha.Whatever was found new in Lazarus' face and gestures was thought to besome trace of a grave illness and of the shocks recently experienced.Evidently, the destruction wrought by death on the corpse was onlyarrested by the miraculous power, but its effects were still apparent;and what death had succeeded in doing with Lazarus' face and body, waslike an artist's unfinished sketch seen under thin glass. On Lazarus'temples, under his eyes, and in the hollows of his cheeks, lay a deepand cadaverous blueness; cadaverously blue also were his long fingers,and around his fingernails, grown long in the grave, the blue had becomepurple and dark. On his lips the skin, swollen in the grave, had burstin places, and thin, reddish cracks were formed, shining as thoughcovered with transparent mica. And he had grown stout. His body, puffedup in the grave, retained its monstrous size and showed those frightfulswellings, in which one sensed the presence of the rank liquid ofdecomposition. But the heavy corpse-like odor which penetrated Lazarus'graveclothes and, it seemed, his very body, soon entirely disappeared,the blue spots on his face and hands grew paler, and the reddish cracksclosed up, although they never disappeared altogether. That is howLazarus looked when he appeared before people, in his second life, buthis face looked natural to those who had seen him in the coffin.In addition to the changes in his appearance, Lazarus' temper seemed tohave undergone a transformation, but this circumstance startled no oneand attracted no attention. Before his death Lazarus had always beencheerful and carefree, fond of laughter and a merry joke. It was becauseof this brightness and cheerfulness, with not a touch of malice anddarkness, that the Master had grown so fond of him. But now Lazarus hadgrown grave and taciturn, he never jested, himself, nor responded withlaughter to other people's jokes; and the words which he uttered, veryinfrequently, were the plainest, most ordinary, and necessary words, asdeprived of depth and significance, as those sounds with which animalsexpress pain and pleasure, thirst and hunger. They were the words thatone can say all one's life, and yet they give no indication of whatpains and gladdens the depths of the soul.Thus, with the face of a corpse which for three days had been under theheavy sway of death, dark and taciturn, already appallingly transformed,but still unrecognized by anyone in his new self, he was sitting at thefeasting table, among friends and relatives, and his gorgeous nuptialgarments glittered with yellow gold and bloody scarlet. Broad waves ofjubilation, now soft, now tempestuously sonorous surged around him; warmglances of love were reaching out for his face, still cold with thecoldness of the grave; and a friend's warm palm caressed his blue, heavyhand. And music played the tympanum and the pipe, the cithara and theharp. It was as though bees hummed, grasshoppers chirped and birdswarbled over the happy house of Mary and Martha.